Kind: captions Language: en Hello, I'm Russell Brand. This episode of Under the Skin from Luminary Media is free and it's fantastic. It's got Ricky Jves in it. Ricky Jves, one of the best comedy stars the world's ever known. I think it's safe to say he's up there with your Chaplain, your Cleleses, your Kugans. They're all British comedians whose names start with C. That's all I'm interested. Your cooks, your Hancocks. Ricky Devase, outspoken host of the Globes, creator of Extras, The Office Afterlife, season two of which is on Netflix now and is the it's because of him promoting that that he's even come on our podcast. This is for you for nothing. But if you want to sign up and get all of the episodes of Under the Skin, which let me tell you are worth it, as well as all the other fantastic content that's on that platform, podcast from Komo, from Queer Eye, no content from uh Lena Dun, get down then. No one's making you stay here. You're not a hostage. I'd say this is a fantastic episode of Under the Skin. I'm very proud of it. It's a brilliant conversation with Ricky Jabase. It's a joy to talk to him. He and me and him as we discuss see the world somewhat differently although we've got loads of things in common. We talk about God, atheism, animals, love, class, fantastic stuff. You'll really, really enjoy it. If you want to get Luminary, if this episode indicates to you that these are the kind of conversations you might be into, then you can get it for as little as $2.99 a month with the with the Luminary annual plan, and you can get a 7-day free trial, which I would recommend to all of you. Check out the brilliant podcasts I've done with well other podcasters like on the platform like Lena Dunham and Kuramo, but also David Eagleman, Neil Degrass, Tyson, Brian Cox, Janice Farafakis, I mean there's like brilliant intellectual conversations. Naomi Klene, I mean it's just like Dr. Shafari last week talking about I mean I really think they are valuable conversations but this one for nothing with Ricky is uh it's especially good as you would imagine from Ricky Jace and uh let me reiterate Afterlife which I've watched is on Netflix now and it's fantastic. Check it out. Hello. Hello mate. It's so lovely to see you. Look at you all grown up. I've become an adult. Well, I'm I'm relieved you're not sat there in a sheet. That was a deal breaker. I said I wanted to conform to Western ways just for one hour. I didn't even need to have that explicitly explained to me. I s intuited that it might not be wise to interview you in a sheet. And why is it 100 p.m.? I mean, that is bang on soup and snooze hour for me. I I have a I have a little lentil soup and then I have a little nap, right? So, now I've had to have my soup at half 12. Gobbled that down. It was very hot and the my nap is postponed till 2:00 p.m. So, this is just some of the hardship that I've been going through during the pandemic. It's a a grueling tale even to sit and listen to Ricky. that kind of suffering. It's uh like the Goolag archipilago listening to some of that stuff. You got a real mic and everything. Yeah, cuz I do like I've been doing a podcast for for ages. So, we put one in the garage like a little podcast studio. Do you I went from the only person with a podcast to the only person without one. So, I had to go the other way. You're an outlier, a pioneer, and an extremist. I'm a rebel. You know, I've always been a rebel. Like Tony Hancock, in fact, just like Tony Hancock's rebel. There's no There's no question you're in that lineage. No question. Do you should we do this little Should we do this little interview? Start it officially. I'll start it with like a compliment to put you at your ease. It's really lovely to interview you. I'm I am very nervous. I can see that your rat. It might be the soup. I drank too quickly. Yeah. Essophical burning and anxiety have similar symptoms. Um yeah, it's lovely to have a proper interview with you. We've had like met a few times. I've never been able to speak to you at depth, but like anyone, I admire you as a comedian very very much. And I still like watch like a lot of your stuff like, you know, maybe even just when you're doing Facebook lives, but also like I still watch The Office. I watch Afterlife, checking out the news series, which is what you're promoting at the moment, doing these like podcasts and that. And it's a real joy to talk to you, Ricky. Thank you. Same. Same. Pleasure. Thanks, mate. Um, I suppose like my compliment was a lot shorter than yours, wasn't it? I didn't give you much back. I felt I felt it wasn't the place cuz I feel like a guest. You are a guest. You are a guest. And in a sense, it's proportionate to our BAFTA backdrops. You've got endless masks. I've got a drape. Let me explain. I've made an effort. I've put a nice little jumper on. I've washed and all that. But this is this is my desk. I'm at my desk. The my my this is the smallest room in the house cuz I thought the echo would because the other rooms are vast and it would be good for So, okay, this isn't this isn't like cribs where I've hired them. I really did win them. I was watching I was watching I I remember I remember a good many of them then for I don't know what that bore is like there's a wild boar. I guess that's some sort of writing guild or is it simply an ornament? That's a Oh, I'm glad you brought that. That's a work of art that um I that was auctioned for charity and I gave so generously. That reminds me what a great person I am. It's good to have a momento of your own greatness next to those less abstract accolades. Good. I live pretty near where you're from, mate. Like I So I see sort of like you're from Reading and of course. And aren't you? Yeah. Yeah. It's obviously lovely around here. Do you live near here? Um well, we've got a little place quite near you. Um but uh my main I mean I mean I'm mostly in Leafy Hamstead. Yeah. Where people like you aren't allowed if I'm being honest. I was there briefly for a while. I lived on Gardenor Road at what I might call the height of my decadence. Yeah. Near Flask Walk and uh Oh, beautiful. Well, we used to visit this uh place, you know, before we lived here. We lived in the center ever since sort of college. And um uh uh to explaining to Americans what Hamstead is like, I I say it's it's sort of bohemian and eclectic and it's the sort of great great grandchildren of artists and poets and me new money. I I always feel that it was like the Beverly Hillbillies when I rolled into town. So, and I think I think I think we're from similar sort of backgrounds where we moved where we moved up to be able to live next door to to wealthy people. So, I still I still feel when I walk into the Ivy, there's a certain amount of disappointment on people's faces. Yeah. It's incredible actually. And like it's sort of a very um clear in your humor that you have that kind of background. I remember watching Martin Freeman on something once saying that you were the first person he'd met that had a sense of humor that made him laugh like people at school. And I remember when I used to when you used to do on stuff on 11:00 show and you talked about like I remember in particular one time when you talked about the apocryful often and then opening their eyes and having a cup of tea there and like I guess this was probably 20 years ago but I remember watching that and thinking oh that's funny man that's funny and I suppose and you've how how have you maintained and do you think you've maintained that kind of access to normality? and that kind of brittle spiky workingass humor now that you are in sconced on the hill. Well, I I think I think I have uh in in many ways. Um obviously all my family still live around reading wokenum fat and you know and they're what you call a working class. They're all manual workers or carers and and then there's a there's 50 I haven't counted them sort of great nieces and nephews that you know. Um, and so, uh, there there's there's that where you're always connected to your family. You always you always feel at home with your family, you know. Um, uh, so there's there's that. I I do it I sort of do it quite consciously try and remember my roots because as a comedian um, so professionally I I I I sort of do as well. I think because we're caught jesters. We have to be caught jesters. We have to have low status. We're in the mud with all the other peasants teasing the king. Not too much because we don't want to get killed, but we have to keep our low status somehow. I think I I feel I want to. And and I do that in two ways. And you do this as well. Um one, I invite them behind the curtain. I go, "What? You think it's great being rich and famous? Well, this is what I said in front of the queen. This is the first time I got a private jet. They thought I was the cook." So I So I do that. I give them the horror stories where I was the putt. I was the wrong person. I shouldn't have been there. I tell them that. And I the other way I do it is I talk about things where they're better off than me. I talk about being fat and old and balding and do you know what I mean? Yeah. So I'm going to die soon. And so you you do have to