Kind: captions Language: en This Sunday, holding power. My exclusive interview with Cuban President Miguel Diaz-Canel &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; as the island nation faces pressure from the Trump administration for a change in leadership. Do you think it is possible [music] to get a deal with President Trump? I think dialogue and deals with the US government are possible but they're still difficult. Would you be willing to [music] step down if it meant saving Cuba? Plus, no deal. The bad news is that we have not [music] reached the agreement. Talks between the US and Iran collapse after 21 hours of high-stakes negotiations. Where does the conflict go from here? And allegations [music] and denials. First Lady Melania Trump pushing back against claims linking her to convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. [music] I am not Epstein's victim. As she calls on Congress to hold hearings for Epstein survivors. And turmoil in the California governor's race. A former staff member accuses Congressman Eric Swalwell of sexual assault. &gt;&gt; These allegations of sexual assault are flat false. As top Democrats urge him to end his gubernatorial campaign. My guest this morning, Republican Congressman Byron Donalds [music] of Florida and Democratic Congresswoman Pramila Jayapal of Washington State. Joining me for insight and analysis are Telemundo news anchor Julio Rivera, &gt;&gt; [music] &gt;&gt; Amna Nawaz, co-anchor of PBS NewsHour, Republican strategist Matt Gorman, and former Biden White House senior advisor Steve Ricchetti. Welcome to Sunday. It's Meet the Press. From NBC News in Washington, the longest-running show in television history, this is Meet the Press with Kristen Welker. Good Sunday morning. We are beginning with a world on edge where the Trump doctrine of regime change is being tested. Vice President JD Vance in Pakistan Saturday for meetings with Iranian leaders overnight announcing no deal had been reached to end the war as the Trump administration works to keep that ceasefire from collapsing. But first, a new front in President Donald Trump's pressure campaign after the fall of Venezuela's Nicolas Maduro and the killing of Iran's supreme leader, President Trump is now warning Cuba could be next. This week, I traveled to Havana for the first US television interview with Cuban President Miguel Diaz-Canel. It comes as Cuba is locked in an extraordinary standoff after the US imposed an oil embargo in January deepening the country's humanitarian and economic crisis that the US says started 67 years ago by Cuba's communist government. I want to start with President Trump because President Trump's threats to take over Cuba come as the United States has removed President Maduro from power, has invaded Iran and killed its supreme leader. Do you fear you could be killed or arrested by the United States? That is very interesting question. Those of us have who have leadership positions in the revolution have a strong commitment to our revolution and to our heroic people. And in this connection, our responsibility entails the conviction and the commitment that we're willing to give our lives for the revolution and for the cause that we defend. So, for me, that is not a matter of concern. If the time comes, I don't think there would be any justification for the United States to launch a military aggression against Cuba or for the US to undertake a surgical operation or the kidnapping of a president. If that happens, there'll be fighting and there'll be a struggle and we'll defend ourselves. And if we need to die, we'll die because as our national anthem says, dying for the homeland is to live. What you're saying is very powerful. But are you afraid for yourself? For your family? Or are you prepared to, as you say, make the ultimate sacrifice if you are attacked? I have no fear. I am willing to give my life for the revolution. Of course, I would li- I I wouldn't like that to be the attitude of the US government. Is Cuba actively bracing for the possibility of a military attack by the United States? Like I've always said in previous meetings previous interviews and when I also address the Cuban people, it is evident that there are threats out there. It is part of the rhetoric of the US government. Cuba has done nothing to offend the US. Cuba has never said about attacking the United States or interfering with the United States affair affairs. However, you hear that Cuba is next, that Cuba is going to be next, that there are there's a way out, that that they're going to take over Cuba. So, from the position of responsibility within the leadership of the of the country, that is a warning. And we need to responsibly protect our people, protect our project, and protect our country. So, we are preparing ourselves for defense. But what is the concept of our preparation for defense? We have a doctrine which is entirely defensive. It is not aggressive. It doesn't pose a threat. In addition, we also believe that as we prepare ourselves to defend is the best way to avoid war and the best way to preserve peace. Let's discuss the situation here in Cuba. The people of Cuba are suffering right now. Your power grid has failed. Food and energy are running dangerously low and these problems existed in some form before the blockade was put into effect. Do you take any responsibility for the pain Cubans are experiencing? Usted es el presidente. No se siente responsable? The Cuban people is suffering. And this can be seen in two areas. In the national aspect and also at the at the family level because everything takes place on a daily basis. But what is the main cause for that suffering? Has been the mistakes that I myself have made or like I said, a collective leadership or is that suffering or the government or is that suffering is the result of the policy of intensified blockade that the United States have maintained? I think that the people can provide that answer. So, these are a number of restrictions which are not applied to any other country in the world. Therefore, we lack financing in order to buy food, to buy supplies for our main productions and services in order to have the the medicines that we need and to carry out the repairs that we need for our national energy system and our industrial factories. How does that reflect on our people now? And yet the people of Cuba say you cannot solely blame the United States because you can trade with other countries. The economy has been in decline for the past 10 years. Hundreds of thousands of people have left Cuba over the past decade. Many of them who are young entrepreneurs. Is that a sign that the Cuban economy and government has failed the people of Cuba? La gente de Cuba? Like I said, when you see that at the family level, how does that happen? There is a scarcity of food, scarcity of medicine. The nights become a very uh long working nights when you've been 20 hours with a power outage. But this is before the blockade. People were suffering before the blockade. Now, let let me explain. Let me explain. There's a confusion in terms of the approach. For example, we were living under the blockade conditions but the blockade was intensified and further tightened and became qualitatively different in the second half of 2019 with the implementation of 240 measures and with Cuba's inclusion in the list of countries who supposedly uh sponsor terrorism. So, everything became worsened. So, we have the accumulated effect of the blockade plus the effect of the tightening of the blockade and now the effect uh caused by this energy blockade. And I can say this responsibly to you, this is not the fault of the Cuban government. We saw it with our own eyes. Los vimos con nuestros ojos. People living in severe poverty sufriendo in the streets of Havana, the capital city. Is it time [clears throat] for Cuba to take some responsibility? To look in the mirror and to change its economic system for the people of Cuba who are suffering here. Que están sufriendo. Nosotros nosotros siempre hacemos análisis muy autocrítico. We conduct very self-critical analysis and assessments of our reality and we're trying to constantly transform and change what we do in order to improve uh what we do. But that's got nothing to do with the political system. It is not our political system that is embracing that inability to move forward. Our political system is serving people. It's serving social justice and making everyone advance. And it seems that it bothers other people around the world because of what it represents, because it is our system for ourselves, not that we want to impose our system on anyone else. And they try to block it like this. We understand that there are conversations between Cuba and the United States. Do you think it is possible to get a deal with President Trump? I think we can have an approach in terms of what is possible and what is difficult. I think dialogue and and deals with the US government are possible, but they're difficult. Cuba has always stood by its commitments, and the United States have not fulfilled its part of the deal. In the At present, the US The US has been engaged in talks with other countries, and while these negotiations are underway, they have attacked those countries, and all of this creates a lot of distrust. And we know that inside the United States there are forces that whenever they see that there's a possibility to engage in discussions, to engage in a dialogue, they try to undercut and boycott those talks. Are you talking directly to Secretary of State Marco Rubio? And do you trust him? We have engaged in talks, and we will be in talks as long as as the United States agrees to with the US representative that they decide in order to have this relationship with us. These talks are very complex processes. First, you have to establish a channel for dialogue. Then, you need to build an agenda for the discussions and including both both the common interest. &gt;&gt; Yes. I haven't spoken to uh Secretary Rubio. I don't know him. Let's talk about some of the key demands the United States has. It includes releasing political prisoners, scheduling multi-party elections, and recognizing unions and a free press. Are you willing to commit to any of those conditions that the United States has laid out? No Nobody has made those Nobody has made those demands to us, and we have that respect