Kind: captions
Language: en
Hey everybody, welcome to the podcast.
My guest today is Dr. Andrew Huberman.
Andrew is a neuroscientist.
He's a Neurobiology Professor at Stanford Medical School
and McKnight Foundation and Pew Foundation Fellow
and the founder of Huberman Lab, where he's involved
in all kinds of really amazing breakthrough research
on brain function, brain plasticity and brain regeneration.
His work has been published in top journals like Nature.
He's been featured in publications
like Time, Scientific America and the BBC.
And he's here today to discuss the brain,
to discuss growth mindset, how to focus,
how to navigate the stressful times and many other subjects.
It's an incredible conversation.
I think you guys are gonna enjoy it.
I appreciate you watching
make sure to hit that subscribe button
and without further ado, this is me
and Dr. Andrew Huberman.
First of all, thanks for doing this.
I appreciate you coming out.
Yeah, my pleasure.
Long time coming.
I'm glad we're doing it in person-
Likewise.
And not remotely.
And I think what I wanna do is start with your origin story,
because you're a very,
it's your path is very unlikely,
your path to becoming a scientist.
And I think it actually also kind of contextualizes
some of the things that I wanna talk about with you today.
So maybe start there.
Sure, so on the one hand, you know,
maybe I was faded to become a scientist.
I guess the two things that are relevant there
are I always loved animals
and I've always been obsessed with animal behavior.
Like just could watch Cousteau shows growing up, you know
underwater life or animals hunting, animals doing anything.
It's just so fascinating to me because I'm, I think even
at a really young age, I've always just been intrigued
in sort of what drives different animals to behave
in the way they do and how body form matches to,
I didn't know what it was,
but brains and how that all works.
So I've always been obsessed with animals.
And then my dad's a scientist, so he's a physicist.
It was really early in chaos theory.
And so growing up in our home, you know, we had scientists
over for dinner and graduate students would come over
for barbecues and things like that.
Is he a Stanford professor?
Yeah, he was at Stanford.
He was mostly at Xerox Park, which is kind of famous
if you read the Steve Jobs book is for the, yeah.
The development of the gooey interface
the graphical user interface
and sort of early days of the computer.
So he had a lab there and he had a lab in applied physics
at Stanford and something called symbolic systems
which is a Stanford degree
in kind of ecology and computation, that kind of thing.
So I grew up in this family where science was very prominent
and we had lots of discussions
in our home that I would overhear
and I didn't understand about physics and we'd spend summers
at the Aspen Center for Physics, which was like-
Good times.
Yeah, so, you know,
and we were, and to be clear, you know,
you hear the word Aspen, you know,
we were a middle-class family
but they have this Aspen Center for Physics.
So the Feynman, you know, Richard Feynman was there,
Murray Gell-mann,
like all these luminaries of physics, Peter Carruthers.
And my dad was really good at telling me the stories
about these guys and then I'd always wanna meet them.
And it was mostly guys back then,
there weren't many women in physics.
So I, you know, I was kind of immersed in science
from a young age, but right about age 13,
my parents split up.
And he moved overseas, he moved to Denmark
and my mom was really struggling with the breakup
and I wasn't in contact with him anymore.
So I had this really unusual childhood where, you know,
we didn't talk about sports, we talked about science,
and I had this close relationship with science
and the people around science
but then all of a sudden the structure around family
like instead of dinners together every night,
it was just like me and my mom
and I was an adolescent, I was hitting puberty.
So, you know, there was bound to be some shifts
in my world landscape and internal landscape anyway.
But basically what happened was, I stopped
really paying attention to school.
And I got really heavily into skateboarding
and the kind of punk rock music.
And I found my pack or my community
through like packing community of kids
that also just were kind of parentless.
So this was like late 80s, early 90s.
And so at a pretty young age, I started taking the,
I grew up in Palo Alto.
I was actually born at Stanford Hospital.
I started taking the seven F bus up to San Francisco
and hanging around in Embarcadero.
For the skateboarders out there, the Lizards,
this is the the now famous EMB crowd.
So this was the birth of a huge movement
of skateboarders that became professionals.
Like, so you'd see the young Danny Way
would come through town and you had Rob Dyrdek.
I remember when he came through.
So all these names that eventually became popular
during the kind of X games era and the,
but at that time it was really underground.
And so it was this pack of maybe a hundred guys
and it was run like a little city and it was chaos.
It was like there was fights,
and there was drinking and there was lawlessness,
there was also a lot of amazing skateboarding
and there were a lot of amazing people.
And there were some older guys,
like one in particular, a very famous skateboarder,
is this kid, Mike Carroll,
his older brother was kind of like the older brother
to everybody, kind of kept us all in check.
So it had its own unique organization.
And it's actually interesting
'cause the same thing was happening at that time
in Washington Square Park in New York,
and at Love Park in Philadelphia, there were all these
like communities of kids that were basically parentless.
And so in that time I saw some interesting things.
First of all, I learned what it was to be parentless.
Growing up in Palo Alto,
it was like soccer games and AYSO and you know,
swim club and all of a sudden I realized, you know,
I don't have to be home at any particular time,
or, you know, none of these kids are going to school.
And so we all, it was kind of a big group of truants.
And it was interesting because it gave me a perspective
that I had never had in Palo Alto.
And I was drifting further and further away
from any kind of academic rigor.
I think I would go to school every once in a while.
What's mom doing?
Does she have any idea
that you're going up to the city every day?
So she was totally checked out.
You know, I think she was just devastated
by a bunch of things that were happening
and she lapsed into a pretty serious depression.
And then in that community, what was interesting is,
I started seeing that, you know, some guys were clearly
faded to becoming professional skateboarders.
They were really good at it.
I just wanna say for full disclosure,
I was not particularly good.
I kept getting injured.
I just, I was not faded to be, you know, exceptional
or very good at it, but I love the comradery
and I love the community, but I also noticed that, you know,
some people were drinking all day and other people got
into hard drugs and people started to, you know,
some of the dysfunction really started to show up.
Yeah, the fracture.
Begins.
Exactly, and so,
and I started seeing that, lot, a lot more violence.
You know, people start getting their girlfriends pregnant.
They didn't have money to support those kids.
You know, it started becoming apparent to me
that there was a lot of dysfunction
as well as a lot of incredible people in that community.
And so about that time, I got a girlfriend,
and the other thing was I got removed from high school.
So I went to kind of the famed/infamous high school
in Palo Alto, Gunn High School.
Oh, you went to Gunn.
I went to Gunn, which is famous because it's the,
one of the most academically rigorous schools
in the country, maybe the planet,
people moved to the area just to send their kids there.
But it also has this very complicated reputations
of the highest suicide rate of any school in the country.
The New York Times has written about this.
So, you know, I would come to school every once in a while
but I could tell you far more about the curbs
in the front of the Gunn High School parking lot
than I could about anything that I learned at Gunn.
So when they say they, you were removed,
I mean, you got, you were expelled.
No, I basically, they just said,
you need to either start coming to school or, you know-
You're done.
Or you're done.
So I got shifted to another high school
and that was same story.
It was just was, it was a mess, it just fell apart.
And so at one point I was brought in, I have a kind
of vague recollection of this, but I was brought in
to have a discussion with a school counselor.
And I don't think I've ever told this story before.
And there was someone sitting in the corner,
this guy was sitting in the corner
and he didn't introduce himself.
And pretty soon I realized when I was like,
I think they're gonna take me away.
Like I started realized, 'cause they realized my mom
wasn't really able to control me.
Wasn't really in a place to support me at that time.
And that's what they did.
They took me away.
They took me into a place up the peninsula,
which was not a jail and it wasn't a hospital.
It was just sort of a place where they put kids
that were-
Like some kind of
GV warehousing situation?
Yeah, a lot of psychologists,
lot of locks on doors, lot of,
lot of kids that, there were 12 of us in there
at any one time, it was locked down.
And the first night there,
I remember I had a roommate who was like really
into cutting on himself, that kind of thing.
And he told me, he was like, "Look, if you just
do what they say here, you'll be outta here in like a month.
And if you don't, you're gonna be here a very long time."
And I remember being pretty frightened for the first time.
And at that point I was like,
oh my goodness, like, this is bad.
You know, like, this is bad.
I'm a long way.
It's so hard for me
to imagine.
I know, I know.
This given you know, who you are and what you do now.
I know and you know, and it was literally like the kind
of one phone call a day kind of thing.
So actually I called I was skateboarding for a company
in San Francisco.
I think they put me on out of sympathy
and I called this guy up and I said, "Look, I've, you know,
they locked me up, I don't know what to do.
Can you help me?"
And he get, and I'll never forget,
I wanna say his name because you're the most normal guy
I know.
Well, he's like-
The least likely of that crowd.
Exactly.
For that to happen.
So, in any event, I was permitted to go back to school
eventually, provided that I went to therapy.
And so I started going to weekly therapy
which in the early 90s was kind of a weird thing.
You would, wouldn't admit it to your friends
but tweets skateboard around Stanford campus.
I was doing my thing and then twice a week
I would go in and see this therapist.
He's a remarkable guy because A,
he had deep training in the mind, right?
And we started talking about what was going on.
And he really picked up on the fact
that there was essentially no structure,
no home life for me, but that I had a strong drive,
and I was really interested in learning.
I mean, I was, I was enthusiastic and motivated enough to,
you know, skateboard as hard as I could,
even though I wasn't gonna go anywhere with it.
So at that point, and the fact that I had a girlfriend,
I started looking for something that I could do.
And I started at one point
I thought I'd join the fire service,
'cause it seemed like the comradery was good.
At that point, I started strengthening my body a bit
because I didn't wanna keep getting hurt.
So I started running, I started lifting weights,
a football coach at Gunn actually turned me on to fitness.
It's actually an interesting guy.
He wrote the script for that movie "Mr. Mom,"
Oh my God.
Yeah, because his wife bet him
that he couldn't do what she could do,
which was stay home with the kids.
And he was this big strong football coach.
And so he made her a bet and he lost.
And so he wrote that script Michael Keaton played the, yeah.
So he taught me, he was like, look, you know
you can't even do a pull up.
You need to start doing your pull-ups and you start running
you know, and he said, the fire service
might be good for you.
So, I was spinning out, but there were people
that were willing to kind of, you know,
point me in the right direction.
So what ended up happening was my high school girlfriend
went off to college and I didn't, you know,
I didn't know what I was gonna do.
So I actually went and I lived in the parking lot
outside her dormitory. I just wanted to be near her.
She was my family at that point.
A college locally or?
She was at UC Santa Barbara.
So you just drove down and-
I just drove down and I just camped out in the parking lot
and people, and I was starting to get into some martial arts
and Thai boxing then.
So I think I was teaching some Thai boxing,
self-defense stuff on campus and doing this kind of thing.
And by the end of that year, I realized
that I should probably apply to college.
So I applied to UCSP and somehow I got in,
Lord knows how I got in.
I did, 'cause I did eventually graduate high school, barely.
Got in, and then after a year I just completely flailed it.
You know, I wasn't going to class.
I was getting into fights, a lot of that kind of mischief
and kind of wildness was still in me.
And what ended up happening was,
I got into a physical altercation on July 4th, 1994
with like a bunch of guys.
And at the end of that, I walked back to the place
I was staying, and of course I wasn't paying rent
because I had learned in those years,
like you can just squat in an empty house.
So, you know, it's Isla Vista California, you know?
So I was really running wild and went back
and just I realized I was like, this picture is really bad.
You know, at some point,
this isn't gonna be like a kid who had some problems,
this is gonna be,
truly.
It's not cute anymore.
It's not cute anymore
And no one,
no one's gonna make excuses about your upbringing
or the lack of parenting.
It just becomes, you just, you're gonna end up
being a ward of the state.
I mean, you were, it sounds like you were,
you were almost a feral animal.
Totally feral.
Actually, and I have some close friends
that's how they they referred to me, that feral.
And it's funny even to this day, I mean,
I'll get to where this eventually took me.
But even to this day, when I go into a home
where it's clearly like a loving home
where there's kids are happy
and there's good food and it's warm and cozy
I always feel this thing like, wow, like amazing.
Like I sort of wanna be adopted by them immediately,
but you know, I'm 45 years old
so that's not appropriate at this age.
What's so interesting,
I keep thinking about David Epstein's book "Range."
Did you read this book?
Which is basically this thesis
that some of the most successful people are not,
you know, we suspect that, you know,
the great talents of the world across all disciplines
are the people who discover their passion at an early age
and practice it voraciously for many, many, many years.
But in fact, it's people more like yourself,
who've dabbled in all different kinds of things
who end up being ultimately, you know,
the most proficient at their selected skillset.
And when I look at your experience,
I see trauma, I see adventure,
I see, you know, all these obstacles that you've had to face
and overcome and manage on your own essentially, right?
And all of those really informed perfectly
the things that you're interested in
and what you explore today in your lab.
Yeah, it really did.
You know, I think that I'm so grateful for those years.
I wouldn't wish them on any kid,
because I think having a secure, loving environment
at home is so key.
And, you know, I should say about a third of the kids
that I grew up with in that environment,
that whole skateboarding, punk rock culture,
about a third have gone on to found companies
or professional skateboarders,
about a third just kind of drifted off
and about a third are dead or incarcerated.
You know, a huge number.
And so there's real value in having a support system,
that's clear, but it exposed me
to all these things like addictions, schizophrenia, rage,
like all these incredible elements.
Like I was never really into drinking and drugs.
I could drink or not drink.
It just wasn't, I wasn't drawn to it, but other people
they took one sip and it was like, that was their thing.
It was like the magic elixir for them.
And so, you know, I was observing what was happening.
And then after that, you know, that July 4th '94 incident
was, I realized this is it, you know, it's now or never.
It really was one of those moments.
You know, you hear about those moments
but it was me realizing I'm living in this squat
where I've got a pet ferret.
My girlfriend's gone, she broke up with me.
She was smart enough to break up with me, you know,
I'm getting in fights, I'm working at a bagel shop.
I'm barely making ends meet.
And at that point I just made the decision.
I just said, okay, look,
I'm not gonna be a professional athlete.
I think I'm pretty good at memorizing things.
I think I have an interest in people,
I'm going to just decide, I just decided to do school.
I decided that was the, that was the track.
And so like, some people pick the military
because it's like, if you know what to expect
at least in terms of the, you know,
the passages that you're gonna go through.
And for me that was school.
And so I had decided, get back in school.
I moved into a studio apartment by myself.
I quit partying completely, I didn't go to parties.
I got really serious about fitness.
So I just started running and lifting weights and I studied.
You went like Henry Rollins style.
I did.
Yeah.
I did.
It's a lot of self-awareness
you know, I mean, people go into the military
because on some level, I mean,
some people do because they're, there's some yearning
for having that structure imposed upon their lives.
But you constructed that kind of structure for yourself.
Yeah, I think I was really afraid.
I think I was like, you know, and I and these days,
you know, 'cause of my lab studies fear
and I get into this whole thing around mindsets
and people always ask me like,
is it better to do something from a place of love or fear?
Like depends.
And at that point, fear was the best motivator for me.
And I just basically worked like crazy.
And it's interesting because I didn't have a mentor
or someone to bring me to that.
But once I started doing that, you know,
there was one professor in particular who took note,
he was like, "Oh, you know,
you seem really interested in this stuff."
And I was like, yeah, 'cause he was teaching me
about depression, schizophrenia, neuro-chemicals.
I thought, I was totally turned on
by the world of neuroscience.
It didn't, it wasn't even called neuroscience back then.
But this one guy, Harry Carlisle
he was teaching me about thermal regulation
and how the brain works and how receptors
in the skin relate to perceptions in the mind.
And he also had a deep sensitivity to mental disease.
And I'd seen a lot of that, you know,
I'd seen a lot of depression and anxiety in my own family.
I had had a friend commit suicide.
Another friend becomes schizophrenic.
I think he's still walking the mission district
of San Francisco now.
Seeing some friends become addicts.
And so here was someone explaining that there's actually
an underlying basis for this.
And I just poured myself into it.
Is that the same guy who, you know,
would smoke underneath the vacuum hood and stuff like that?
Like a bit of an (indistinct).
Yeah, he was amazing.
So he was a favorite teacher of many students,
but if you could get into his lab
then you were kind of one of the chosen ones I guess.
He's like the perfect mentor at the perfect time for you.
Yeah, so he used to drink coffee in lab
which you're not supposed to do.
He's just smoke cigarettes in lab in the fume hood.
And they used to come and yell at him
and he would do it anyway.
And I thought, you know, this guy
he doesn't even know what it is, but you know,
he's a punk rocker and he doesn't even know.
And so, you know,
he gave me an opportunity to work in his lab.
And at some point he told me, if you go to graduate school
they'll actually pay you to do science.
And what ended up happening at that point
was I hit a brick wall because I was,
I had a lot of resentment toward my dad.
I felt, you know, here's my dad.
He was a scientist, he had, you know,
left us all this kind of thing.
And I realized if I didn't do this,
if I didn't take this opportunity,
it was going to be the most foolish thing ever.
You know, what am I gonna do to spite my, you know,
my parents, you know, I was 20 years old at that point.
So I just made the decision.
I'm gonna get a PhD and become a professor.
I'm going to get tenure and be like this guy, you know
this guy who has looked like he had a pretty good life
to me, and so that's pretty much how I spent the, you know
the last 25 years of my life is doing experiments.
It worked out.
It worked out, is it, a lot of work,
I mean, I didn't have the power of concentration.
I hadn't read all the good books that Gunn High School
students read growing up.
I had to learn how to speak properly.
I learned how to, learn how to think properly
and really learn how to commit to something
that was very linear and at times was very painful.
And I went to some pretty extreme things.
I, you know, I actually used to set a timer
and I wouldn't allow myself to get out of the chair
until I was, the timer went off.
So, and I would experience extreme agitation
but over time I got pretty good.
And now I can do long stints of work without any breaks.
And yeah, it worked out.
It developed that neuroplasticity
in your favor, ultimately.
You're always a reader though, right?
I loved books.
So I would, you know, I would hide
in the tower books section in the evenings
and I would read everything about fitness, psychology,
anything I could, I've always devoured information.
My favorite book when I was a kid was the "Encyclopedia,"
or the "Guinness Book of World Records."
So I was like, when I was a little kid,
I'd walk around the Aspen Center for Physics.
And I would tell anyone, I didn't even ask them,
if they want to hear about like the,
what's the world's smallest ethereum mammal.
You know, I would like, it could tell you all these facts
that were kind of meaningless at the time,
but I've always been fascinated
by the inventory of different animals on the planet
and their different behaviors.
And so yeah, voracious reader and still now.
I love, I love information.
Well, as a neuroscientist, I mean,
you're your own patient.
I mean, the fact that you were able to, you know,
turn your life around in such a dramatic fashion
and do it essentially through sheer will and you know
setting up practices that would feel you,
you in that right direction,
and then being available when those mentors
showed up from the, from the, you know,
the early therapist, sounds like that guy
almost saved your life, right?
He absolutely saved my life.
He gave me the book, "Wherever You Go, There You Are"
the Jon Kabat-Zinn book.
And he said, no pressure, but if you can develop
a mindfulness practice where you can sit still
for like 10 minutes a day, it'll serve you very well.
So I started doing that.
Like he could've, he could've told me to hang out
of a window by my ankles, I would have done it.
I think there was a, there was a self preservation thing
was kicking in for me.
So I got very interested in mindfulness meditation.
He also, it was, I think, quite smart in saying,
look there's a whole world of psychedelic drugs
that are powerful in influencing the mind.
He said, "If you're going to explore those,
wait until your brain has already developed,"
which I think is a controversial statement in and of itself.
He, so he actively discouraged me to go down that path,
which I think was the right thing,
given I was a minor, you know,
and nowadays there's all this discussion now
about psychedelics and their power.
And I think they are very interesting compounds
but he really steered me towards behavioral practices.
Like what could I do each day from waking up
to going to sleep that would serve my mental health
and my productivity well.
I owe him a tremendous amount.
And especially because he wasn't just
in the psychoanalytic theory,
he also was like cognitive behavioral.
He understood the power of practices
not just discussing issues.
Yeah, to begin a meditation practice at that age
in the mid 90s, that's pretty radical.
Yeah, I felt it was funny 'cause I thought
if I didn't sit in the lotus position
like I wasn't doing it properly, you know,
back then there was all this stuff around,
it was very mystical and in my family
'cause my dad's very conservative
and my mom was a little bit more of a free spirit.
I was taught that anything that related to hippie culture
was doomed to fail and cause problems.
And then anything that was related
to like conservative culture was faded
to advance the progress of humanity.
It turned out neither one was true, of course.
So I, but I needed people to push me in those directions,
lift weights, run, meditate,
do your schoolwork, do your homework.
And so I think I, you know, now I have a good relationship
with my parents, but I think I had to go out
into the world and find those, you know, sort of paternal
and maternal figures because they weren't in my home.
I needed to find those.
Do you look back on your upbringing with gratitude?
Like how do you reflect on that experience
and how it informs how you think about what you do now?
I'm immensely grateful for it because you know,
where I'm at today is, you know, my lab works on a number
of issues related, you know, sort of hardcore neurobiology
of regenerating the brain, you know, trying to fix,
basically cure blindness and repair visual systems,
but also things related to, you know, fear, courage,
mindset, stress, anxiety, trauma, et cetera.
And the early seed of seeing how science is done,
definitely gave me an advantage.
I won't lie, you know, I seeing how scientists interact
and behave and understanding that they are just people.
'Cause a lot of what was discussed in my home was
about the people, not just the science they do,
that really gave me an advantage.
And then seeing all that dysfunction and realizing
that the human animal is amazing at making plans,
at modifying its brain if it wants to, but the human brain
and the human animal are also dreadfully bad
at doing what's best for us.
Because of this, what I think it comes down to is the fact
that our reward systems are not designed
for things that are just good for us.
They're designed for things that optimize the progression
of our species, but they're also, they will grab on to
and ratchet into any behavior that makes us feel good.
And so the human brain is really not optimized
for making best choices.
And so, those years of seeing all that.
I could testify to that.
Yeah, it's and it's, I wouldn't trade those years
for anything.
And I still have great friends in that community.
I mean, I think, you know, any, had I joined
a different community, I would have found the right people
as well, but to be with a, you know, a huge pack
of feral kids at that age
and to see the function and dysfunction
and also it was wild, it was a lot of fun.
I can imagine.
It was a lot of fun.
That's a whole set of stories
for another time.
Did you see that movie,
"Mid 90s?"
"Mid 90s" and the movie "Kids", the Larry Clark movie.
When I saw that movie, first of all, I had a lot
of friends that were in that movie
'cause he used actual skateboarders.
In "Kids?"
Yeah, I actually knew a couple of those kids
and you know, it's a movie, but there are a lot of things
about that movie they're very accurate.
And when I saw that movie
I was like, yeah, that's like right.
Pretty much a day in the life in Washington Square Park.
And you know, I mean it was a little extreme on some end
but you didn't know where you're gonna end up each night.
And that was a unique experience, you know?
So yeah, and "Mid 90s" was really good.
I think it captured the essence of what it is to be a kid
that's just looking for some group of people to join.
And skateboard is a unique sport because you get young kids
and grown men and now women and girls do it as well.
It didn't happen so much then, but now there are a lot
of great, awesome skateboarders that are female
but they're all hanging out together.
You wouldn't find that in soccer.
You're not gonna get little kids playing with grown men.
So you get exposed to a lot 'cause everyone's
at develop, different developmental stages.
But yeah, it was an amazing thing.
I wouldn't change it for anything.
Cool, well, let's segue into talking about the brain
and maybe we could start with, you know,
how you think about the brain specifically?
Like, what is the brain, what does it do?
What does it not do?
You know, it helps us survive.
It's our portal into trying to make sense of the world.
Like what's the starting point
in the discussion around the brain?
Yeah, so the brain and nervous system, which
so it's like brain spinal cord connections
with the body and back in.
I don't distinguish between brain and mind.
I think that's like an 80s discussion or earlier.
And I think it would take us down the wrong track.
So brain or mind to me is interchangeable.
Mind, body, is kind of interchangeable
because the brain is connected to the body
and the body is connected to the brain, right?
If I, you know, pinprick my hand and it hurts
my brain registers it where it happens
it's kind of an irrelevant discussion.
I think we really need to just appreciate
that the nervous system is designed
to orchestrate all the processes in the body
not just thinking and not just behavior
and really can be divided into five things.
So there's sensation and sensation is really bound
or restricted by the receptors in the body.
So receptors in the eye that perceive photons, light energy
per se, receptors in the skin that perceive pressure
you know, touch receptors, smell, taste, hearing, et cetera.
And the interesting thing about sensation and the fact
that the nervous system needs to pay attention
to sensation is it's non-negotiable.
The nervous system of humans is designed
to extract physical phenomenon from the universe
that are non-negotiable, photons of light.
I can't see in the infrared with my eyes
and I can't see ultraviolet light with my eyes.
And I can't perceive that
because I don't have the receptors for it.
So, you know, other animals can perceive
some of those things
but that leads us to the next thing, which is perception
which is which sensations are you paying attention to.
So all the time you're sensing things like right now
your feet are sensing the contact with your shoes,
but you're not thinking about it until I say that.
And then you shift your perception.
So perception is like the spotlight.
So the brain wants to constantly bring in sensation.
It's non-negotiable what's coming in.
It's just dependent on your environment
Perception is negotiable, you can control that.
'Cause I just said shoes
and you thought about your feet and there you are.
Then there are feelings which can be a little bit nebulous
but feelings are a link between our emotion
and generally invokes the body,
sensations in the body and concepts in the mind
and what those sensations are about.
That's really what emotions are.
Animals definitely experience them.
I'm kind of appalled to think that 10 years ago
people like, do animals have emotions?
Of course they have emotions, right?
Because those are bodily sensations merged
with some perceptions, so of course they do.
And then there's thoughts and thoughts are interesting
because thoughts happen spontaneously.
Think about like a web browser
that's constantly giving you pop-ups
but thoughts can also be deliberate.
So you and I can decide right now that we're gonna think
about a plan for something or we're gonna think
about what's going on in the world.
So thoughts happen spontaneously and they can be deliberate.
And then the final thing is behaviors and actions.
So the nervous system is responsible for sensation,
perception, feelings, thoughts, and behaviors.
And what's interesting,
we start to think about that as you're like, okay
that's a lot, but what is the nervous system
really trying to accomplish?
Like on any given day or at any moment,
what's it trying to accomplish?
And it's really trying to accomplish one thing
which is to take perceptions of the outside world
and merge those with perceptions of the inside world
what we call interoception and to link those in a way
that's operating on an environment in the appropriate way.
So what do I mean by that?
So if I'm feeling anxious,
and I'm in a very calm environment, I'm gonna perceive
that rapid heart rate and kind of feeling of agitation
in my body as inappropriate for the moment, right?
And my goal then as an organism is to adjust
my level of what they call autonomic arousal
or alertness down.
If I'm in a great party or I'm at a wedding
or it's a celebration or I'm at a protest or, you know,
then I might feel that my level of alertness
is appropriate for my environment.
So the nervous system is in this constant,
dynamic interaction with the outside world
and trying to figure that out.
One way and this can be kind of conceptualized
is there's an emerging idea that's kind of interesting
about impatience.
So we've all had the feeling of being impatient.
Some people are far more patient than others,
but if you've ever been in line at the store
and you feel like something's going very slowly, you know,
the person in front of you is taking a long time,
they're doing some returns, you're getting kind
of impatient, maybe you're breathing in a mask,
and you're like, ah, like you're, you know,
what's the ideas that if you're getting a certain frequency
of pulses from your body,
and if those pulses are coming in quickly,
like you're perceiving yourself that interoception quickly,
it's like pulse, pulse, pulse, pulse.
You're gonna be more geared
towards your internal representation.
And then you're seeing what's going on in the outside world.
And it seems like it's going very slowly,
but there are other times when you're in line at the store,
someone's getting some returns and you're texting
on your phone or you've had a great day,
you've had a great run, your family's in great shape,
and you're fine, why?
Well, that frequency of those pulses, that interoception,
is matched pretty well to your outside environment.
And so impatience is really when your internal
sort of metronome, tick, tick, tick, tick,
is not matched well to the external environment.
There are other times when you're feeling
like your internal metronome is tick, tick, tick,
and you've got a million things coming at you through email
or texts, you've got a bunch of things and you're feeling
overwhelmed and tired.
Well, in either case there's nothing right or wrong
it's just your body and your brain are trying to say
what's going on in the outside world,
and how well matched am I to it?
Right.
So if you think about some of the, sort of core practices
of mindfulness and self-regulation of like focusing
on breathing or focusing on, you know, state of mind,
a lot of that is trying to bring more awareness
to your internal state,
but what our brain is normally doing when our eyes are open
and we're interacting in the world
is we're constantly trying to update our internal state
to match external demands of the world.
And this hearkens back to a, you know,
like a really early design of all nervous systems
which is how do you take an organism that needs
certain things, food, water, mates, reproduction, shelter.
How do you move that organism?
How do you create a system that will do that
in best relation to the environment?
And so what mother nature has done is designed a system
a series of systems.
Let's just take agitation and stress for one,
if an animal or a human is very thirsty
you feel kind of agitated might get up
and get a drink of water.
If you're very thirsty,
it can put you into a state of panic.
If you're extremely thirsty and water is a limited resource
you might even result the violence to get it
or negotiation of some sort that you wouldn't
if you were calmer.
So the stress and agitation were designed
to actually mobilize the body
to take us into the direction of something that's adaptive.
So you can start to see these kind of core elements
of what the brain and nervous system do.
Sensation, perception, feeling, thought, and action
and this constant challenge
of trying to match our internal state
to the external real estate, the outside world.
And you start to see that the sensations that we call stress
or impatience or calm are really the result
of those attempts that the nervous system
is trying to perform.
That's a lot to take in and super interesting.
And it, you know, it's prompting in me this,
you know, attempt to try to wrap my head around
what within the brain is mutable, which is kind of, you know
what your work is all about versus what is immutable
like you were talking about thoughts
like pop up windows on a browser.
You know, some, sometimes our brains are just doing
what they do and that there are things that we can do
like mindfulness and breath work
and the practices that you're talking about,
hypnosis which is another thing that you're involved in
to help, you know, help us like take better,
manage better that process to kind of take the reins
and be more in charge rather than be prey or victim
to these kinds of things that just occur
without our conscious awareness.
Well, I think that, you know,
in terms of value of understanding the nervous system
and where it can be steered,
it's absolutely clear that the nervous system can change
in response to experience.
So this thing we call neuroplasticity is really that,
it's the brain's ability to modify itself
in response to experience.
And I think it's important to understand that from birth
till about age 25, the brain is extremely malleable,
in a kind of almost passive way where kids are exposed
to things and the brain is just wiring up.
I mean, the brain is designed to adjust itself,
in order to be in concert with its surroundings
and to optimize that just the way we described it
a minute ago.
Like a way that a child can learn a language
very quickly-
Or three languages.
Play a guitar or something like that.
Yeah, without an accent, you know,
three languages without an accent, it's remarkable
and try and do that after age 25, it's very challenging.
And so the brain is basically designed to be customized
in the early part of life,
and then to implement those algorithms
in that circuitry for the rest of your, of its life.
And so the brain can change in adulthood
and it can change provided that there's an emphasis
on some perceptual event.
So in other words, if you wanna change your brain
as an adult, let's say you wanna be less anxious,
you wanna learn a new language,
you wanna be more functional in some way, presumably,
the key thing is to bring focus
to some particular perception
of something that's happening during the learning process.
And the reason for that is that
there's a neurochemical system involving acetylcholine.
And it comes from these two little nuclei
down in the base of the brain called the nucleus basalis.
All day long you're doing things in a reflexive way,
but when you do something and you think about it
very intensely, acetylcholine is released from basalis
at the precise neurons that were involved in that behavior
and it marks those for change
during sleep or during deep rest later.
So for people that wanna change their brain,
the power of focus is really the entry point
and the ability to access deep rest and sleep.
Because most people don't realize this
but neuroplasticity is triggered by intense focus,
but neuroplasticity occurs during deep sleep and rest.
And we can talk about how to optimize
those different brain functions.
One of the things that's really important
also to think about how the brain works
in terms of plasticity and all this stuff
is what the brain really wants to do is also pass as much
of what it does off to reflexive behavior as possible.
So, when we're talking about focus
I think it can get a little bit vague,
but it might be useful to think about like
what exactly is focus and what triggers plasticity?
So the brain loves to be able to just do things,
pick up coffee cups and drink and walk
and talk and do things and not put much energy into it.
When we decide to focus what the brain really does
is it switches on a set of circuits
then all the frontal cortex
and nucleus basalis and some others
and it's trying to understand duration,
how long something's gonna last, path, what's gonna happen,
and outcome, what ultimately is gonna happen.
So duration, path and outcome.
You know, the events of early 2020
are a good example of this.
One of the reasons why it's so exhausting to be alive
in 2020, is because we are now having to pay attention
to duration, path and outcome.
How long is this thing gonna last?
When are, you know, when are they gonna open up
all businesses?
Did I touch that door handle?
Does it matter?
You know, who are the experts?
Are there any experts?
You know, there are a lot of questions
whereas normally, we can just move through life
without having to do all that analysis.
So if it's a simple example
like trying to learn a new language or a new motor skill,
or a new way of conceptualizing something,
maybe somebody who's in a therapeutic process
and they're trying to work through a trauma
or something like that,
duration, path and outcome is built
into the networks of the brain.
We can do that very easily, but it takes work.
And it almost has a feeling
of underlying agitation and frustration.
And that's because of the circuits that turn on
before acetylcholine are of the stress system.
So when you or I decide we're gonna learn something
and really dig in, norepinephrine which is adrenaline
is secreted in the brainstem and in the body.
And it brings about a state of alertness.
Then our attention which is mostly a diffuse light
is brought to a particular duration,
path and outcome analysis.
This would be thinking about what somebody is saying,
what are they really trying to say?
A hard passage of reading, a hard, you know,
set of math problems, you know,
a challenging physical workout.
When you do that, these two systems have to work very hard
and the adult brain doesn't really wanna change
the algorithms they learned in childhood.
But if you do those two things,
you have alertness and focus, the acetylcholine
and the norepinephrine converge
to mark those synopsis for change.
And so, so the way to think about neuroplasticity
if one wants to change their brain is bring
about the most intense concentration you can to something.
And then later bring
about the least amount of concentration to that thing.
So I'll talk about that in a second,
but there were some studies that were done at Stanford
by a guy named Eric Knudsen that showed that plasticity
in the adult brain any age, can be as robust
as it is in childhood, as fast and as dramatic,
provided the focus is there and it's all contingent
on this acetylcholine molecule coming from nucleus basalis.
So you say, well, how do you do that?
How do you get it, you know?
Well, I've got friends that you nicorette thinking
that's gonna get them there
because nicorette is a nicotinic acetylcholine agonist
but that's gonna globally increase acetylcholine.
So I always tell them that's not the right approach.
The right approach is to bring as much focus
to a behavior or to a thought or to an action pattern
and there has to be a sense of urgency.
So what Knudsen lab showed and another lab at UCF
Mike Merzenich's lab showed is that
if there's a serious contingency, like in order
to get your ration of food each day,
you have to learn this thing.
The degree of plasticity is remarkable.
But if there isn't an incentive,
it just isn't gonna happen.
So the circuits in the brain that mother nature set up,
are designed to be anchored to a real need.
And people always say to me, well, should I do something
out of love and a real desire to learn,
or should it be out of fear, but either one works.
The sense of urgency is just acetylcholine.
It's norepinephrine, that's all it is.
It doesn't, the brain doesn't have a recognition
of whether or not something is pleasureful or not
until later.
Once you start accomplishing your goal,
the reward systems like dopamine start kicking in.
But I think if people are interested
in modifying their brain for the better, at least some,
you know, top contour understanding of how urgency
and focus must converge for that to happen can be useful.
Because I think there's a lot of attention paid
to whether or not something feels like flow
or whether or not it's see what I call
highly desirable states or whether or not you can,
you can eat a plant out of the ground
that will magically put your brain
into a state of plasticity.
And the answer is yes, such plants exist,
but what's missing is the focus component.
If that work is not done with a particular end goal in mind,
you'll get plasticity, but you'll get plasticity
in a kind of across the board,
it's like learning nine lang, learning a little bit
of nine languages all at once, is not gonna make you
speak coherently in any one of them.
So focus is the key.
Right, I mean, this idea of flow
is so much in the vernacular now.
And you know, my sense is that people
are trying to measure their level of engagement
against some sort of theoretical idea
of what it's like to be in that flow state.
And if they're not experiencing it,
they feel like they're doing it wrong
or they're, they feel guilty or they beat themselves up.
And for me, it's, a lot of it is just hard work.
Like right now, I'm trying to finish this book
and I should have been working
on this book for like the last nine months, right?
And I just couldn't, couldn't get it together.
Like it's a collaborative project.
So there's a lot of different people
that are involved in this,
and they've been working diligently sort of daily, you know
putting this thing together.
And I've just been focusing on the podcast
and been unable to immerse myself in this project
because I know from past book projects, when I go in,
I go all in, like the addict in me kicks in
and it's like, it just becomes my universe.
And I've been completely paralyzed from taking that on.
And so I've dithered away most of the quarantine
without being productive on this project.
And then about 10 days ago, we had a meeting,
and we established this deadline at, you know,
July 10th to turn this thing in.
And it was like a switch got flicked.
And I went all in and it's all I can think about now.
And in fact, everything else feels like extraneous
and a distraction.
I just wanna get back so I can focus on this thing.
And 10 days ago, I couldn't get myself into that position.
And it's made me think about like,
what is going on in my brain that, you know,
it's such a drastic state change.
And what did I do to switch that
while a deadline was imposed upon me and whatever happened
neuro-chemically with that set in motion
like a chain reaction of events that got me into the chair.
And once I began the project for me,
it's all about like momentum, right?
It's like, to start getting to the starting line
and beginning is so hard.
Like, I will just go forever without doing it.
And then I'm in, and then I'm all in 110%.
And I'm like, why can't I just,
why can't I be that person who just worked on it, you know
an hour and a half every day for the last three months?
Well, I can offer some potential explanations.
I can relate.
And none of it involves a flow state.
It's all hard.
Yeah, and you know, I'm friends with Steven Kotler
I think flow and I think the chicks in Mohali
who originated this thing of flow is really interesting.
But I say right now, the most we can say about flow
mechanistically is backwards it spells wolf.
We don't really understand flow.
Now people have come up with these theories.
It's like, you know, hypo hyper frontality.
I haven't seen the data and I'm not picking on anybody.
I'm putting that out there
as a prompt for people to discover this.
I think that, and to work on it.
I think it's a really interesting, highly desirable state
but I think we need to get comfortable as a culture
in trying to understand our species and how we work,
that the early stages of hard work
and focus are gonna feel like agitation,
stress and confusion, because that's the norepinephrine
and adrenaline system kicking in.
None of us would expect to walk into the gym
and do our PR lift, or, you know,
a performer go do something without warming up.
The brain also needs to warm up
and start to hone in which circuits are gonna be active.
And it's unreasonable for us to think,
"Oh I've got an hour, I'm gonna plop down
and write beautifully for an hour my best work."
We need to accept that there's a period
of agitation and stress that accompanies the dropping
into these highly concentrated states.
Now, in terms of the reward that accompanies the feeling
that we're funneling into that groove
of being productive in one regime
like for you writing this book,
the dopamine system is really important to understand.
So we've talked about norepinephrine kind of
gets you going, acetylcholine is the spotlight of attention.
The dopamine system is mother nature's hardwired,
ancient system in all animals
including humans to put us on the right path.
Now it's, a lot of people talk about dopamine
as this thing that you get when you publish the book
or when you get the book deal
or when something wonderful happens like your child's born.
And that's true, but dopamine's main role is to be released
anytime you achieve a milestone,
or you think you're on the right path.
And when the dopamine system is tethered
to a particular pattern of focus,
remember duration, path and outcome.
So it's like, okay, you sit down,
maybe you don't get much text out
but then the next day you get 800 words
of really solid text and you feel good, like I'm into this.
What does that dopamine system do?
The dopamine system takes the norepinephrine
which is normally rate limiting.
Like at some point there's so much norepinephrine
that you quit and we can talk about that.
It's actually the substrate for quitting,
dopamine can push that noradrenaline back down,
that adrenaline back down and give you more room,
more space to do duration, path and outcome work,
highly focused work.
And I'm making duration path outcomes
synonymous with highly focused work.
Why would this happen?
So let's think about an animal.
Let's think about a deer that wakes up and is thirsty
and it's wandering out looking for water.
That animal needs water.
It doesn't know that it needs water.
It experiences agitation the same way that a baby
feels agitation when it wants food
but it doesn't know it needs food.
It just feels agitation and cries
and a caretaker comes, hopefully.
That deer is now foraging for something that it needs.
And let's say it smells water,
'cause a deer can actually do that and arrives at a stream
and takes a sip of water, there's dopamine released then,
that puts it on a path to maybe a larger lake
or something of that sort, or to be able to go cheap food.
So when we are on the right path,
and we hit a milestone, dopamine is released
and it tends to tighten our focus more for that activity.
So the dopamine, this is why drugs of abuse
and why alcoholism and some process addictions,
which are behavioral addictions are so dangerous
because they, a lot of those drugs of abuse are dopamine.
So it becomes this cyclical loop where there's
no other behavior that can evoke the same level of release.
In fact, I sort of define addiction
as a progressive narrowing of the things
that bring you pleasure.
And I say that
because it really is the way that the dopamine system works.
Normally the dopamine system is designed to be generic.
It's designed to get me to do lots of things,
social quality, social interactions
you know, work, exercise, all those things,
just like the stress system is designed to get me
out of bed in the morning,
cortisol pulse is what gets me out of bed in the morning.
It's also what leads me to, or led me to pursue a career
in science out of fear, initially, and eventually pleasure.
So the dopamine system is tethered to those states of focus
and it's what mother nature designed
so that the neuroplasticity would occur
and you would want to continue those behaviors again
in the future.
That deer needs to know and remember
and create a memory, not just aware that stream is,
but the process of, oh, when I feel that agitation
I'm gonna get up and go down this particular path.
And so people think of the dopamine system
as this kind of like catch all for reward,
oh, you get likes on Instagram and it makes you feel good.
That's not really how it works.
And the important thing to understand
is when you start getting a convergence of norepinephrine
so that level of agitation
duration, path, outcome, acetylcholine, and dopamine,
now you're starting to wire in the behaviors
that make people really good at certain things.
Now in a functional view of this, so not addiction,
what this means is that for any of us,
success in any endeavor is very closely related
to how much focus we can bring to that endeavor.
And the reward system you start to realize
is entirely internal, no one's coming along
and cramming dopamine in your ear
or dripping it in your brain, it's all internal.
And this starts to bring us
into the kind of like discussion around mindsets.
Because, so my colleague Carol Dweck,
who popularized this thing, growth mindset,
it's and again, a very misunderstood concept.
It's the idea that we can change.
So that's built into that, but the discovery
of growth mindset was of these kids that actually
really enjoyed doing problem sets
that they knew they couldn't get, right?
But for them, they would get this like dopamine release
from just focusing on the problem.
They liked doing puzzles they couldn't get right.
It sounds crazy, but inevitably,
those kids are very good at puzzles
and very good at math and on these kinds of things.
So growth mindset is I believe,
if a certain neuroscience lens on growth mindset
would be that the agitation and stress that you feel
at the beginning of something
and when you're trying to lean into it
and you can't focus is just a recognized gate.
You have to pass that through that gate
to get to the focus component.
And then if you can reward the effort process
you really start to feel joy
and low levels of excitement in the effort process.
That's that buffering of adrenaline.
That's that feeling like, yes,
I've got a lot of adrenaline in my system
but I'm on the right path.
It feels good to walk up this hill, so to speak.
And when you start to bring those neural circuits together
you really start to create a whole set of circuits
that are designed to be exported to any behavior you want.
So if it's writing a book, great, if it's podcasting great,
if it's building a business great.
If it's, you know, building a terrific relationship, great
then the circuits that mother nature is designer
incredibly generic so that we could adapt
to whatever it is that we need to do.
And I think the misunderstanding
around how these circuits work,
has led to this idea that there's some secret entry point
maybe marked flow on the door
and there's a trampoline up to that door
and you just open that door and you're gonna be in it.
And nothing could be further from the truth.
And anyone who's done well in any career or athletic pursuit
knows this, but unfortunately there's a kind of obsession
with the idea that it's all supposed to feel good
and it does feel good but there's a whole staircase
in which it feels kind of lousy.
Yeah, I mean, the feel good aspect
of that experience is very subtle.
And I think, you know, in a kind of global way,
what you're talking about is falling in love
with the process.
Like you have to push this gate open, which might require
you know, more effort than you're comfortable with.
But once you push through, it is about, you know, that daily
the daily rigor and the tiny wins that you get from that,
rather than, you know, it's easy to, you know,
you set a goal, but that goal becomes very abstract, right?
And it's those tiny little things that you're getting done
every day that bring you that internal satisfaction
that are like calibrating that plasticity.
Is that what you're saying?
Yeah, absolutely.
And what's incredible is the extent to which the mind
and thoughts, remember earlier we were talking about
how thoughts are spontaneous.
You can't control them,
negative thoughts, traumatic thoughts, bad thoughts,
trying to suppress those is futile.
If there's one message I can send people
it's just don't even work at that,
but work at the process of introducing thoughts
as almost like you would introduce actions,
because we can introduce thoughts.
And, you know, Carol Dweck has talked about this,
that positive self-talk is not the same thing
as growth mindset, because positive self-talk
is almost always linked to the ultimate outcome.
If I'm losing badly in something,
and I tell myself, I'm doing great,
I know that I'm lying.
There's no dopamine release from that.
And you know, a lot of the self-help wellness culture
of the 80s and 90s was like, it's impossible
to be in a bad mood if you're smiling.
We won't have any depression on the planet if that's true.
There's probably some feedback
from the face to the brain, but it's not that simple.
But the idea that you can self reward
the effort process is extremely powerful,
because what it means is
that if you can recognize agitation, stress, and confusion
as an entry point to where you eventually wanna go,
I do think that just that even just mental recognition
can allow people to pass through it more easily.
They think they're doing something wrong
and then rewarding yourself when you achieve any milestone,
like, you know, running to a particular location
if you're trying to run a long distance
and then registering that as a partial win,
what we know is that the dopamine that's released
in response to that suppresses the total amount
of adrenaline and gives you more room, more time,
more energy to run in the running example.
And this is anchored in a real scientific result.
So last year there was a paper published
that essentially was asking why any human
or animal quits at any behavior.
Now, certain behaviors like I can't lift a car,
unless it's a very small car.
I can't lift a car, but if we're talking about running
or we're talking about long bouts of work, the question is,
why do we quit?
Like, what is that?
And it turns out that every time we exert effort,
a certain amount of noradrenaline in the brain is released,
and there's a sort of a counter in the brainstem.
And at some point enough noradrenaline is released
and it shuts down cognitive control, deliberate control
over the motor circuitry, and we quit, that's it.
But the thing that can restore those levels
or it can sort of reset those levels lower
and give us more gas, more mileage, is dopamine.
And it makes perfect sense because our species had to move
against very challenging things in nature
and in certain, so in culture at every stage
of our evolution including now,
2020 is a good example of this.
And when a good example would be,
if you're really slogging it out and things are miserable,
just think like the worst family vacation,
everything's a disaster or a very hard physical event,
and someone cracks a joke,
you're almost immediately feel a sense of relief.
You see this in the team that wins the Super Bowl.
Both teams slogged it out.
You have to believe they were both at max effort
the entire game.
Look at the team that wins,
they have extra energy,
they're jumping all over the place.
So it can't be physical energy.
It can't be glycogen related.
It's not ketone related.
It's nothing in the body in that sense.
It's dopamine's ability to take that level
of norepinephrine and smack it back down.
And so we can learn this, right?
I mean, I think this is where there's real power
like in your story,
or the story that I'm familiar with from your book.
Like the ability to push through those pain points
is something that we really can export
to other aspects of life
because it's the same neuro-chemicals that are involved.
So when you get to a particular location
or maybe your, recall, you know, a portion where you're just
you're feeling lousy, you know, you're injured,
or you feel like you're hurt and you can reframe it mentally
and think I'm actually still on the ladder.
I'm still holding onto a wrong.
I know that at least that much, I'm still breathing.
I know that much.
And the lift that we get is not some psychological pump-up,
it's a neurochemical thing.
It's dopamine suppressing norepinephrine, and saying
you're on the right path, you can keep going.
It's a permission to keep going.
And we grant that permission to ourselves,
no one grants that permission to us.
I think one of the other kind of misconceptions
that we wanna dissolve is this idea
that external rewards can actually propel us
down long paths of success and high performance.
They can't.
It's internal rewards.
No, that's a sustainable
fuel source.
Yeah.
I have a friend from the SEAL team
and somebody asked us recently, we were giving a talk
and somebody said,
"How can I make sure that I continue to self reward,
and I'm not driven by these extra rewards?
How can I continue to have that drive?"
And his answer was very good.
He said, "Give away all the external rewards."
You know, now not everyone can afford to do that.
It's just about you and you.
It's just you and you.
And the more attach there's a famous Stanford study done
at being nursery school, probably not far where
from where you were in the dormitory,
there was a little nursery school in Escondido village.
And they did a study where they looked at kids
that like to playing during their recess,
it's all recess in nursery school, but they're drawing.
And they took the kids that really liked to draw.
And they started giving them little gold stars
on their drawings.
And then they liked the gold stars
for a kid that's an extrinsic reward.
And then they stopped doing that and the kids stop drawing.
They just, they associated the good feeling of doing it
with the external rewards.
We have to be very cautious about how much
of our internal dopamine we attach to external rewards,
if we wanna continue to grow
and pursue and focus and work hard.
If you just wanna get to someplace and cash in, then fine.
But most people find themselves in a pretty miserable place
because their dopamine was so attached to external rewards,
they need more and more of that.
Well, the why has to be deeper than that.
I mean, the thing that I kind of always default to
when I hit that breaking point or, you know
I'm training or I'm racing or whatever,
and I'm at that stage where it's just like,
I can't go any further,
the first thing I do is I reflect inward
on why I'm doing this to begin with, like, what is the,
you know what is the value system
that I'm trying to tap into?
What is it that I'm trying to express?
Like what got me to this point?
So it's a reminder, and then I just set,
like I just say, well, I'm just gonna get
to the next lamppost or I'm gonna, you know,
get to the next intersection or whatever it is.
I break it down into the tiny, I'll quit after that.
Like the more I can just root myself in the present moment
and distill it down into the tiniest of digestible chunks,
that's the only way I can, you know,
continue to move forward.
And I've learned over time that the more I do that, then
you know, suddenly I'll find myself
in a different mental, like it will shift, right?
Just because I feel that way in that moment
is not determinative
of how I'm gonna feel 10 minutes later.
Absolutely, there's an interesting process that occurs
when people start to realize that rewards are all internal
and what they start to do is they start linking
this duration, path, outcome thing,
to their internal rewards.
And so to put this simply one of the most powerful things
that any person can do is to learn to control
this idea of duration, path, and outcome
and attach an internal sense of reward
just that you're doing well to reward yourself mentally
just say, "I'm doing well, I'm actually on the right path."
To do that inside of the demands
that come from the external world.
The more often that we can self reward
some aspect of the process provided
it's in the right direction of what we're trying to achieve,
the more energy we're gonna have for that,
the more focus we're gonna have for that.
And remember that the reason I say energy,
I don't throw that around loosely is that limiting amount
of noradrenaline is constantly being kept at bay.
You literally keep buffering the quit response.
And so when people start realizing
that if they set the goals inside of the larger goal
and self reward each one of those
they essentially have an infinite amount of energy
to pursue those goals.
They have an infinite amount of focus to pursue those goals.
You see this most in the special operations community
and people that are selected essentially for this process.
It's one of the things that's been intriguing to me.
I have some friends from the SEAL teams
and I don't begin to really understand the real work
that they do deployed
'cause I've never done that kind of work
but I've always been intrigued
by the selection process,
the so-called BUD/S process, right?
Because carrying logs and getting in cold water
and all that, that's not really how the work is.
That's really not what the work is about.
So the selection process is interesting
because everyone shows up fit, motivated,
and convinced that they're not gonna quit.
I mean, I think like there might be a couple of days
you'll just show up to show up,
but everybody is absolutely convinced.
And then a very small subset of them make it through.
And I'd be willing to bet
that the ones that make it through,
of course they're gritty and resilient
but they all are essentially, right?
So that's necessary, but not sufficient, obviously,
otherwise they, everyone would make it through.
The people that make it through somehow
are able to tap into a process.
Maybe it's a reward process.
Maybe it's through self punishment,
maybe it's through self reward in the positive sense,
but they're able to control something
inside an environment that is not controlled by them.
It's controlled by the instructors.
And I've always been struck by the fact that in order to
to not in order to get through, you just have to not quit.
Remember people aren't being deselected.
They're not saying, get out of here,
you're not good enough, you're not,
people are deciding that for themselves.
And so it's interesting because it brings
about a real-world experiment of people who are quitting.
And I believe they're quitting because they can't manage
these neurotransmitters.
And the people, when I say manage,
I think that the people that get through
knowing some of these people quite well,
had an internal process
by which they could reward themselves
for doing something that might've just look trivial
to everybody else, but it gave them more gas, more energy.
And what's interesting is the process,
the kind of unconscious genius of the BUD/S process
is that they've picked two sensory events
that are across the board, challenging for everybody.
One is cold water, which is great, because it
most of the time it can't kill you, right?
It's not like heat, which can kill you.
It's cold water and sleep deprivation.
And so the ability to do these, like what I'm calling DPOs
this duration, path and outcome steps and procedures
is great on when you're rested, you know,
you know, when you have, when you're well fed, well slept,
you can do anything.
You can be in any hard conversation
you can work through anything.
So what they do is they start taking
the autonomic nervous system, which is these deep reserves
of the nervous system
that when our autonomic nervous system is off,
it starts making us pay more attention
to how we feel than the demands of the world around us.
Remember that basic challenge in the nervous system.
And so sleep deprivation is the best way
that you can pull somebody down from their ability
to analyze duration, path and outcome and reward themselves.
Sleep deprivation is the way
in which you essentially pull apart the nervous system
and the way that it wants to function
because it's very easy, again, rested to do all this.
But so what they do is they're sleep deprived people
they put them in cold water,
they're trying to get them more in touch
with the way that they feel inside than what they need to do
in response to the external demands.
Everyone I know that's made it through that process,
did it slightly differently
but I'll tell you how they didn't do it.
They didn't do it through sheer grit and determination.
They did it through attaching a sense of meaning.
They did it by micro slicing the day, or slicing the day
into a series of meals that they just needed to get to
and then rewarding themselves
for getting to that next milestone.
So they don't know, I mean, most of them,
you know, probably had very low concept
of dopamine and norepinephrine, but that's the process.
That's also the process
I think that allows someone to finish an ultra.
I've never run an ultra, but I think that process
of self reward is grit and resilience,
in a kind of neurochemical definition.
And I think it's the thing that anybody can tap into.
And I think it's, therefore, I think it's so key
because I think people think that it's just so key
that people understand, excuse me,
that these circuits are not unique
to people who run ultras or people that make it through
you know, stringent filter, special operations command.
These, it's the same thing
that anyone can do.
It is interesting.
Yeah, the ultimate determinant
isn't your physical conditioning.
And yet that's what everybody focuses on.
It's what's going on in, you know,
internally, mentally, neuro-chemically
that's making the difference
and the people that are able to best calibrate that
and find these, you know, strategies for managing
are the ones that get through whether it is an ultra
or BUD/S and BUD/S is like this perfect,
it's almost like its own lab, right?
For studying human resilience in a certain respect
but you have actually taken some of these people
and tested them in your lab, including David Goggins, right?
So, what do you do when you, when these people visit you
and you're like, I'm gonna deconstruct you here,
figure out what makes you tick.
Yeah, so I had the good fortune of meeting David
at a consulting event a few years ago.
And I guess I should just say, David,
you probably know this already, but he is,
every bit is intense as he comes across.
Yeah, I mean,
what you see online.
His private persona is-
Yeah it's exactly the same.
What you see is what you get.
Really wonderful and obviously extremely impressive
human being.
David anecdote, so the night before we had this event,
he came out to the lab.
My lab, we do, we study fear.
We study courage, we say resilience.
And we say the underlying neurochemical substrates
for those.
So we had a bunch of guys there,
a couple of team guys, some other folks, and we bring them
in this little room and we do virtual reality there.
And one of the things that we used to scare people
or to generate a sense of autonomic arousal
is this experience of diving with great white sharks.
Which of course, you're not in water,
you're in the laboratory, but it's very immersive.
And for people that are afraid of sharks,
it can be quite scary, not always,
but we also have heights, we have claustrophobia,
we got something where you can feel spiders
crawling all over your body, if you're an arachnophobe.
You know, if you have a pain point, we find it.
Do you spend time trying to figure out
what that pain point is?
We do and we do it through some very covert methodology
that involves AI and some fun tools.
A bunch of weird questions that, right, all right.
Let's just say this, from the moment you step
into our laboratory, we're studying you.
so the-
Now I know.
And yeah, exactly.
So what was fun was, you know,
so I sort of explained what the platform was
and what we were gonna do.
And David said, he goes, "I don't like sharks."
And I was like, all right, well, and so then, you know,
this was not a typical experimental day in the lab.
So I just kind of, at one point I finished describing
what the tech is and how we're going to wire people in.
And then I said, "So who wants to go first?"
And he's like, I'll go.
Right, of course.
And what was funny to me at that moment
I realized this is interesting because he,
he was very explicit about the fact he didn't like sharks.
He was very explicit about the fact
that he was going to be first, you know, first man in.
I mean, it would be inappropriate
for me to describe his data, right?
And we didn't do a full-blown experiment
but what I can say is he's, whatever it is
that David has figured out how to do,
it clearly involves taking whatever adrenaline pulse
he feels and understanding something fundamental to biology
which is that adrenaline response was designed
to move us not to keep us stationary.
He uses behavior as the way to shift sensation,
perception, feelings, and thoughts.
He understands how to run that program
in the right direction.
Whereas most people, when they don't like what they feel,
they start negotiating sensation, which will never work.
They start trying to control their perception
which is hard, right?
They're like, I'm not gonna think about that
or I'll think about it differently.
Very hard to control the mind with the mind.
He knows that's a tough one.
Yeah.
Feelings, Lord knows what those are
and how to control them.
I mean, we'll eventually figure that out as a field,
but thoughts are complicated.
So he just goes immediately into action.
He goes forward towards it.
So when he says, just for clarity, when he says,
"I don't like sharks", he's basically saying
put me in the shark tank, like, he's cuing you to say
this is the thing I'm afraid of
and I'm gonna be the first one to volunteer
and I know you're gonna put me in the shark tank
if I tell you that, right?
Exactly, and I think, and I obviously can't speak for him,
but one of the things I think is very clear
is that he's tapped into this neuroplasticity process
through the door through the portal of agitation and stress,
he's figured out the, and this is really the holy grail
of neuroscience is how can I modify my brain?
Well, you modify it by placing yourself into discomfort
and using that as a propeller to move you into action.
And, you know, a couple of years later
when David was working on his book
and I heard the book was coming out,
I think I saw a pre-release announcement,
I texted him and I just said, look
"I'm really excited to see your book."
And he said, "Oh great, thank you.
You know, be great if you'd write something
like an endorsement."
I said, "Oh, I'd be honored to, I'm happy to."
And he said, "But I need it tonight."
And this was Saturday.
I think it was like 10:30 at night when I texted him.
So it's a great, well, I'd be happy to, I won't do it now.
He said, "I need it by midnight."
So I sit down and I start writing this thing
and these are short blurbs, but I kind of realized
that you know, you wanna get it right.
It's David and you know, my name's next to it.
And I wanna do do it justice.
So I'm sitting down, I'm working on the saying
and I texted him, "Look, I'm gonna be a few minutes late.
No problem, no problem."
Finally, I sent him the thing at like 12:30 at night
and he's like, "Aw, bro, thank you, thank you, thank you.
I promise I'll send you a copy of this and that."
And I was like, grateful, you know, thank you.
And then I realized that that time he was living in New York
and I said, "Wait a second, where are you?"
He said, "New York."
And I said, "It's 3:30 in the morning."
And he goes, "Yeah, I'm going running."
And I realized at that point, I was like, okay
you know, there's, it's undisputable.
You know this guy lives the persona
that he projects into the world.
And even that day, that consulting gig, you know,
there was a four o'clock lag
and he was like, no, let's keep going.
So he's figured something out.
And I think that his enormous popularity is it's earned,
because he's figured out that it really doesn't matter
if you come at something from a place of joy and love.
And that would be wonderful, but there's a whole other set
of ways to approach this, that involve slogging
through the discomfort, the doubts, the wish for things
to be different and starting with behavior.
And it's incredible 'cause if you think about sensation
perception, feeling, thought and behavior,
actually the way to control our nervous system
and feel the way we wanna feel is to run that backwards.
Behavior, thoughts.
So if you change your behavior, then generally
your thoughts, your feelings and your perceptions change.
And everyone tries to come at it from the other end,
but he's figured out through whatever process led him there
and incredible life circumstances, how to run it
in this direction of behavior first.
And I really think that if neuroscience has anything
to offer, it's some understanding of what the underlying
chemicals and neuro-circuits are, but the sooner
that the human animal, the human species can start
to understand that our feelings and our thoughts
and our memories and our all that is very complicated,
but that when behaviors are very concrete
and they are the control panel for the rest of it.
I don't wanna relegate feelings,
feelings are extremely important.
I don't wanna relegate perception,
they're extremely important, but when it comes to wanting
to shift the way that you function, to get better
or to perform better, or to show up better,
or to move away from things like addictive behaviors,
it's absolutely foolish for any of us, me included,
to think that we can do that by changing our thoughts first,
it's behavior first, thoughts, feelings
and perceptions follow.
Mood follows action.
This is like been my mantra forever.
And, you know, I swear by it.
And David's example illustrates that that act first
he's developed so much neuroplasticity that it's reflexive
for him to just move towards the hard thing
or the challenge or the discomfort, right?
And now the science establishes
that this is indeed the case.
And yet our programming, our default hard wiring is to,
you know, put us in this place where we want to ruminate
on all this stuff.
And wait until we feel like doing something before we do it
or check our motivations for it.
But anytime I'm in a funk or I wanna change my state,
I have to move forward.
I have to do something with my physical body in order
to shake things up and, you know,
rearrange whatever's going on mentally.
So, and it, and it works every time.
It works every time because the brain circuits
meaning sets of connections and chemicals
they're there from birth, they're there your whole life,
and they were designed for that.
So in 2018, a graduate student in my lab published a paper
in Nature, showing that in the face of a physical threat,
there are three options.
You can obviously freeze,
you can retreat, or you can move forward.
And