Kind: captions Language: en Hello, I'm Russell Brand. This episode of Under the Skin from Luminary Media is free and it's fantastic. It's got Ricky Jves in it. Ricky Jves, one of the best comedy stars the world's ever known. I think it's safe to say he's up there with your Chaplain, your Cleleses, your Kugans. They're all British comedians whose names start with C. That's all I'm interested. Your cooks, your Hancocks. Ricky Devase, outspoken host of the Globes, creator of Extras, The Office Afterlife, season two of which is on Netflix now and is the it's because of him promoting that that he's even come on our podcast. This is for you for nothing. But if you want to sign up and get all of the episodes of Under the Skin, which let me tell you are worth it, as well as all the other fantastic content that's on that platform, podcast from Komo, from Queer Eye, no content from uh Lena Dun, get down then. No one's making you stay here. You're not a hostage. I'd say this is a fantastic episode of Under the Skin. I'm very proud of it. It's a brilliant conversation with Ricky Jabase. It's a joy to talk to him. He and me and him as we discuss see the world somewhat differently although we've got loads of things in common. We talk about God, atheism, animals, love, class, fantastic stuff. You'll really, really enjoy it. If you want to get Luminary, if this episode indicates to you that these are the kind of conversations you might be into, then you can get it for as little as $2.99 a month with the with the Luminary annual plan, and you can get a 7-day free trial, which I would recommend to all of you. Check out the brilliant podcasts I've done with well other podcasters like on the platform like Lena Dunham and Kuramo, but also David Eagleman, Neil Degrass, Tyson, Brian Cox, Janice Farafakis, I mean there's like brilliant intellectual conversations. Naomi Klene, I mean it's just like Dr. Shafari last week talking about I mean I really think they are valuable conversations but this one for nothing with Ricky is uh it's especially good as you would imagine from Ricky Jace and uh let me reiterate Afterlife which I've watched is on Netflix now and it's fantastic. Check it out. Hello. Hello mate. It's so lovely to see you. Look at you all grown up. I've become an adult. Well, I'm I'm relieved you're not sat there in a sheet. That was a deal breaker. I said I wanted to conform to Western ways just for one hour. I didn't even need to have that explicitly explained to me. I s intuited that it might not be wise to interview you in a sheet. And why is it 100 p.m.? I mean, that is bang on soup and snooze hour for me. I I have a I have a little lentil soup and then I have a little nap, right? So, now I've had to have my soup at half 12. Gobbled that down. It was very hot and the my nap is postponed till 2:00 p.m. So, this is just some of the hardship that I've been going through during the pandemic. It's a a grueling tale even to sit and listen to Ricky. that kind of suffering. It's uh like the Goolag archipilago listening to some of that stuff. You got a real mic and everything. Yeah, cuz I do like I've been doing a podcast for for ages. So, we put one in the garage like a little podcast studio. Do you I went from the only person with a podcast to the only person without one. So, I had to go the other way. You're an outlier, a pioneer, and an extremist. I'm a rebel. You know, I've always been a rebel. Like Tony Hancock, in fact, just like Tony Hancock's rebel. There's no There's no question you're in that lineage. No question. Do you should we do this little Should we do this little interview? Start it officially. I'll start it with like a compliment to put you at your ease. It's really lovely to interview you. I'm I am very nervous. I can see that your rat. It might be the soup. I drank too quickly. Yeah. Essophical burning and anxiety have similar symptoms. Um yeah, it's lovely to have a proper interview with you. We've had like met a few times. I've never been able to speak to you at depth, but like anyone, I admire you as a comedian very very much. And I still like watch like a lot of your stuff like, you know, maybe even just when you're doing Facebook lives, but also like I still watch The Office. I watch Afterlife, checking out the news series, which is what you're promoting at the moment, doing these like podcasts and that. And it's a real joy to talk to you, Ricky. Thank you. Same. Same. Pleasure. Thanks, mate. Um, I suppose like my compliment was a lot shorter than yours, wasn't it? I didn't give you much back. I felt I felt it wasn't the place cuz I feel like a guest. You are a guest. You are a guest. And in a sense, it's proportionate to our BAFTA backdrops. You've got endless masks. I've got a drape. Let me explain. I've made an effort. I've put a nice little jumper on. I've washed and all that. But this is this is my desk. I'm at my desk. The my my this is the smallest room in the house cuz I thought the echo would because the other rooms are vast and it would be good for So, okay, this isn't this isn't like cribs where I've hired them. I really did win them. I was watching I was watching I I remember I remember a good many of them then for I don't know what that bore is like there's a wild boar. I guess that's some sort of writing guild or is it simply an ornament? That's a Oh, I'm glad you brought that. That's a work of art that um I that was auctioned for charity and I gave so generously. That reminds me what a great person I am. It's good to have a momento of your own greatness next to those less abstract accolades. Good. I live pretty near where you're from, mate. Like I So I see sort of like you're from Reading and of course. And aren't you? Yeah. Yeah. It's obviously lovely around here. Do you live near here? Um well, we've got a little place quite near you. Um but uh my main I mean I mean I'm mostly in Leafy Hamstead. Yeah. Where people like you aren't allowed if I'm being honest. I was there briefly for a while. I lived on Gardenor Road at what I might call the height of my decadence. Yeah. Near Flask Walk and uh Oh, beautiful. Well, we used to visit this uh place, you know, before we lived here. We lived in the center ever since sort of college. And um uh uh to explaining to Americans what Hamstead is like, I I say it's it's sort of bohemian and eclectic and it's the sort of great great grandchildren of artists and poets and me new money. I I always feel that it was like the Beverly Hillbillies when I rolled into town. So, and I think I think I think we're from similar sort of backgrounds where we moved where we moved up to be able to live next door to to wealthy people. So, I still I still feel when I walk into the Ivy, there's a certain amount of disappointment on people's faces. Yeah. It's incredible actually. And like it's sort of a very um clear in your humor that you have that kind of background. I remember watching Martin Freeman on something once saying that you were the first person he'd met that had a sense of humor that made him laugh like people at school. And I remember when I used to when you used to do on stuff on 11:00 show and you talked about like I remember in particular one time when you talked about the apocryful often and then opening their eyes and having a cup of tea there and like I guess this was probably 20 years ago but I remember watching that and thinking oh that's funny man that's funny and I suppose and you've how how have you maintained and do you think you've maintained that kind of access to normality? and that kind of brittle spiky workingass humor now that you are in sconced on the hill. Well, I I think I think I have uh in in many ways. Um obviously all my family still live around reading wokenum fat and you know and they're what you call a working class. They're all manual workers or carers and and then there's a there's 50 I haven't counted them sort of great nieces and nephews that you know. Um, and so, uh, there there's there's that where you're always connected to your family. You always you always feel at home with your family, you know. Um, uh, so there's there's that. I I do it I sort of do it quite consciously try and remember my roots because as a comedian um, so professionally I I I I sort of do as well. I think because we're caught jesters. We have to be caught jesters. We have to have low status. We're in the mud with all the other peasants teasing the king. Not too much because we don't want to get killed, but we have to keep our low status somehow. I think I I feel I want to. And and I do that in two ways. And you do this as well. Um one, I invite them behind the curtain. I go, "What? You think it's great being rich and famous? Well, this is what I said in front of the queen. This is the first time I got a private jet. They thought I was the cook." So I So I do that. I give them the horror stories where I was the putt. I was the wrong person. I shouldn't have been there. I tell them that. And I the other way I do it is I talk about things where they're better off than me. I talk about being fat and old and balding and do you know what I mean? Yeah. So I'm going to die soon. And so you you do have to particularly when people know what top comedians earn now. It it's like um I sort of embraced that as well. I teased them. I like I did, you know, like uh talking about house and wealth in an ironic way and they get that as well. And I I I'm sort of saying, listen, this is luck. I do you know what I mean? This isn't I don't think I deserve this. Um uh but uh I think people get it as long as you're honest. It would it would when if I see a millionaire comedian going either way uh either side of that like uh talking down to an audience that everything's is a is a battle story that they won or you know they've already they're already on stage they're already an expensive suit or whatever and and now they're telling the audience that they're wrong. Again I do that ironically but they get it like a mate. I call them scum and they they know they get that I'm saying the opposite. Um but uh it would be equally stupid um when I see millionaire comedians going so I was signing on yesterday and um I was on the I was on the bus and no you [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] weren't. No you weren't. you know, but I usually go the other way. Like um uh I typical joke I did in Humanity was um uh press they always ask, you know, wealthy entertainers, how much is a pint of milk? Um that's meant to show you you're and I then I say I don't know. I haven't checked. But the next time someone asks me, I say, I don't know, mate. It is a grand. Run and get me one. So I I I I sort of embrace my privilege um for comic effect. I think the first thing that most of us know you for it couldn't be a clearer exemplification of authenticity. The office whether it's the way it was shot, the way that it was scripted, the kind of uh acute observation of normality and mundanity. So like sort of from the outset there is an authenticity to your work with something that more recent like afterlife which I watched as I was instructed to watch the first couple. It's brilliant. It's you know it's like someone told me you got to watch it. I watched uh one and a half. Do you know what I mean and like and like it's I've loved the first series. I think there's great people in it. I love Roshene. I love that woman Joe that's in it. I think it's a really brilliant cast. I love her that's off of Charlie Brooker's stuff as well. She's wicked. Obviously, you're great. Um, like what uh are you do you have the same level of uh authenticity and uh sort of I don't know cander when you're making something like that? And if so, where are you getting the stuff about suicide and despair from? It's it's it's sort of the only thing I care about now more and more. Every day I wake up and I sort of say, um, is this is this honest enough? Is this more true? I like I'm peeling away these layers and going, you know, it sends you mad because I I I don't feel that I want to be more famous or richer or win more awards. I feel that am I being am I using my platform to its greatest effect now? Am I being more honest? Am I getting everything off my chest before I die? Am I am I really do I really mean this? Am I I can only do things that I'm passionate about because you'll get caught out. So the answer is yes. And um the office um I suppose uh realism was sort of fortuitous or by accident or or whatever. Um cuz I worked in an office for 10 years. So it was harder for me to get it wrong. You know what I mean? Because I'm going that wouldn't happen, that didn't happen, that wouldn't. So that was easy. I was also emulating something I it was a it was a fake docu soap and I'd watched a lot of those through the 90s where an ordinary person got their 15 minutes of fame and uh you know it was interesting just being at work. So that was the influences. So it was easy it was easy to make it real and you know later you find out that we probably cheated less than real documentaries particularly by today's standards. We wouldn't have a camera waiting for someone. We wouldn't get them caught doing something unless it was a really elaborate spy or they forgot their mic was on. So, um uh I I've always been obsessed with um with realism. All the my favorite things were real. Even even to the point that um uh well the first time I saw a Mike Lee thing I'm sort of I don't know for I just thought this is I'd never seen this before. People talking over each other and it wasn't even intimate. It was a you know a shoddy old play shot with a few cameras. It wasn't even as good as he it became. And even in that even in Abigail's party which I thought and I still think is genius. There's one bit that made me feel guilty that when he says, and it's a great joke. It's a great joke. Um, uh, he goes, uh, Shakespeare, complete works of Shakespeare, leather bound, and they go, he's showing up, and he goes, of course, you couldn't read that sort of thing. And I sort of thought, well, that's a snobby joke cuz you know what? Most people don't. And that's and is that is that is he taking the piss out of my tribe that are trying to better themselves, but not quite get it right. And there was still a little flitter of, oh, okay. Okay. So, when I came to do it myself, I wanted I did want to embrace that that that sort of honest working class thing. I wanted a mix like Billy Connelly. I just thought I wanted to be like him that he spoke to his crowd like you do to a mate down a pub. And um uh and I remember one of my first uh I had a meeting with uh Channel 4 about the show even before The Office when I I did um the 11:00 show and uh and the big thing there was um Chris Morrison and Brass Eye which I thought I still think is amazing. Um but it's also very sort of uh it's very sort of Guardian, isn't it? It's not like, do you know what I mean? It's but the people who love it are and I thought I want to I want to mix that sort of comedy and that sort of I suppose pursuit of excellence and intellect but make it sort of accessible. And so I remember I turned the I want to do um I was I was talking to someone and um uh I said I sort of want to bring that to the working classes which sounds very patronizing early days but I felt that you know my family didn't watch Brass Lie. I felt like I was part of the media loving something. Do do you know what I mean? Yeah, I do know what you mean. I understand the idea of sort of uh cultural eliteism and esotericism and I feel like like you know you obviously have an incredibly refined uh sense of humor and at the risk of bolstering a compliment that I've already given you that was scarcely reciprocated I feel like you're a genius like like in a like proper Hancock Clean kind of lineage and even though your background is sort of marked by ordinariness and ordinariness and the sort of gentle beauty of the ordinary is obviously something that captivates you there is something alienating first I think about that kind of insight that you have and I and I would offer also secondarily by becoming very successful and I I wonder about how you like what how you've experienced alienation both prior to success and subsequent to it also bearing in mind like you know like prior to your uh comedy career you know the stuff with the new romantic looking 20-year-old Ricky Jay stuff and also remember I did mention to you about suicide and despair earlier so if you can just have an answer that covers all of that territory. Jesus. Um, uh, well, I I don't know if I've I I I don't know. I don't think I've ever suffered from any of those more chronic conditions of I I've never I've never really felt that alienated or I've never suffered from terrible anxiety or depression without cause, you know. I've had I've had grief you know, loved ones dying, all that. Um, uh, growing up, I just, I mean, I didn't I didn't know I was poor and working class till I was 14, 15. I didn't, do you know what I mean? We're all in the same boat. I went to a comprehensive school. Um, I was, you know, I was I was smart, so I was in the top few there. I always I always felt I'd go to university. I just that, do you know what I I never felt everything's out of my reach. I never thought it won't happen to you. Um, which is odd. Yeah. I don't know why I had that confidence. Maybe I didn't. Maybe I'm remembering it wrong. Maybe it was bravado. Or maybe I just thought that's the only way to do it. Academia. Um, uh, it's so funny because, you know, 500 years ago to move through a class, you know, you had to be a great warrior and you might get a night but that was very rare and dangerous. Then the industrialists started you know finding coal and or you know prospectors went and found gold and they moved up and they moved into neighborhoods like mine. Um and uh you know they they became wealthier than the wealthy. But in our sort of lifetime, it I suppose the the last group to do it were was it's pop pop culture, you know, it's it's it's footballers and pop stars where, you know, you suddenly heard workingass and regional accents and they were in mansion houses and driving Rolls-Royces into pools, which I'm sure you've done, but I never would. I'd go, that's a waste. Let's get you. Um, so, uh, he's thrown a tally out. We can, we can fix this. We can fix this. Um, so I'm sort of aware of all those things, but I never I never felt it. I was never conscious of it, you know. I suppose the first time I went through an interview at university, that's when I heard people who sounded a bit like the queen and I hadn't heard that accent. my you know my teachers were working class it was like everything they were working class they were lads they were working class lads in a in a comprehensive school in med um so that's when I you started mixing with um people you know of difference uh in in class and wealth and um I remember meeting someone he he he didn't know what a supermarket was and I thought he was winding me up I thought he was winding me up. Um, and I guess I I played it a bit cuz I my first year I I gave myself a skin head and I loved the fact that I was IDed going into the college and I could show my So I I definitely and I I remember I wore my dad's old uh lang donkey jacket in Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Hi guys. I'm working class. I'm one of the 6%. Hi guys. You know what I mean? It's like Um but uh what was the last part of the question? Have I Well, I guess I was sort of talking about like you've sort of explained didn't feel alienated, but like but you also don't seems like you you wore literally your class as a badge and didn't feel inferiority and like I suppose like you know a character like David Brent like who's like under all this sort of excruciating social pressure and wants to better himself on camera right through to uh the protagonist in afterlife dealing with despair like it's like in your like and and of of course your obsession with uh authenticity. I wonder where in your own life is it something that's very private to you feelings of well because it it does go into your art but sometimes you know I I'm I'm very keen for people to know that they they they shouldn't use every joke as a window to the soul of the comedian because sometimes I'll I'll make a joke or or routine that is the opposite of what I feel because it makes the joke better and I I'm very I'm militant about people going listen it it it sometimes it's just it really is just a joke and sometimes it's the opposite of what I believe I start with my my supernatur I do a sort of a an off color joke and they go oh they've grown and I go that was irony you see because that's when I say something I don't really mean and you as an audience laugh at the wrong thing because you know what the right thing is it's a way to and I sort of and they get it and then I I call back that sometimes I do I go no don't let me down now remember what we said so I'm playing with those those those constraints and misunderstandings. But um your first point that David Brent um he was sort of on that cusp. I was fascinated that that Cle did it a little bit with with Faulty Towers where you know it was he was he was sort of lower middle class and you know he wanted to uh his aspiration was Buckingham Palace whereas by the time I got around to doing the office the new aspiration was Beckingham Palace. It was that sort of level you know what I mean? I want to be on telly that whatever I want to be on telly I want to be famous and it was just creeping in then. Um and it was a a very important part of the office without it being a fake documentary that is a very boring average sitcom. There's some jokes, there's some great performance, but if you don't know why this man is acting like that, you've lost 50% of what's funny and tragic about that. And he, you're right, he's trying to move just like Basel faulty. He's trying to move, right? But he's doing it for the same reasons, right? And you all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] usual. I want that. I want this. We need that. We have to do this. But it all comes down to one thing, right? It's being happy. It's being happy with yourself and having and and then what's being happy? Well, there's there's so many boxes to tick. And the one people forget is worth. It's the It's absolutely massive. It's worth and um so all those things went into David Brent, but he basically needed a hug. And I remember in the days when you were in every paper and doing every interview, right? You you someone said, "What's your favorite thing?" And you said, "Um the office." Uh, and there was a picture of David Bent and uh, you talked about David Bent and you said it's beautiful. It's sad and it is. And I I'm and by